so we ended last time with some
these element elementary properties that
you know about the absolute value
so
prove one more theorem about the
absolute value which
maybe you didn't cover
in calculus but
it's a
fundamental importance
in real analysis which is the triangle
inequality
which states that for all x y and r
the absolute value of x plus y
is less than or equal to the absolute
value of x
plus the absolute value of y
okay so why is it called a triangle
inequality well
let me uh
instead
of x and y being real numbers let's
think of these as as vectors so
um
there's x
let's
say uh
y and then
vector x plus y
is
this side
then what this is stating is that the
length
of
one of these sides of this triangle is
less than or equal to the sum of the two
sides the sum of the lengths of the
other two sides of the triangle
okay
so that's why it's uh called the
triangle inequality
okay so
proof is not very difficult
although this inequality
is
probably
one of the three most useful things
you'll learn in this class if you go on
to study more analysis
uh the other one being okay so i'm
coming
uh
this is knowledge from uh pde so i'm i
guess i'm kind of viewing it through
that lens of what i find useful in pdes
but triangle inequality integration by
parts change of variables those three
power
the analysis machine that i'm most
familiar with
so how to prove the triangle inequality
if x and y is in r
then clearly
by
property number six the abs x is less
than or equal to the absolute value of x
and y is less than or equal to the
absolute value of y so their sum is less
than or equal to the absolute value of x
plus y
and not only that
i can replace x by minus x and i get
minus x
plus minus y this is less than or equal
to the absolute value of minus x
plus the absolute value of minus y but
this is just
absolute value of x plus y
and both of these therefore imply
so if i just take this and multiply
through by minus one
uh
this inequality which by number five and
the properties that we
approved for the absolute value implies
that the absolute value of x plus y is
less than or equal to
the absolute value of x
plus
the absolute value of y
so let me just make a
remark about the reverse triangle
inequality which
will make an appearance in your
assignment
and
so
this involves
the absolute value of x minus y
and the absolute value of the difference
in the absolute values
why is it reversed because the
inequality reverses
the absolute value of x minus the
absolute value in y
take the absolute value this is less
than or equal to the absolute value of x
minus y and you'll prove this in the
assignment okay
so these two
so you know this follows from the
triangle inequality but these two uh
inequalities get used uh quite a bit and
we'll use them quite a bit throughout
the course
okay
all right so let me take a minute
to reconnect um
uh
r with
what you know and love from calculus
namely decimals
and
we're going to use this fact about r
uh to answer you know a natural question
that maybe
you're asking yourself
which is the following
so let me raise this as a question
um
so this first part is not
a question we've already
uh addressed this in the first
assignment the fact that
the rationals is countable in fact you
did it for the positive rationals but if
the positive rationals are countable you
can then prove that
all rationals are countable
and
a natural question is are accountable
okay or is the set of real numbers
countable
okay
um
so
in the end
i'm not going to leave you in suspense
the answer is no
and we're going to prove this but let me
just make a few remarks about what this
says
so
it's the following so
if q
so this is not a proof of this i'm just
going to make a remark based on this
answer
so
since r
is uncountable
and q
is countable
this implies that
our take away q the set of irrational
numbers
is in fact
uncountable
why
so uh
so i'm just gonna say in words why this
is uh true
so
suppose otherwise that both the rational
numbers and the irrationals are
countable
then you can map in a bijective fashion
the rationals to the natural numbers
and the irrationals
also to the natural numbers but then you
can map those natural numbers to 0 minus
1 minus 2 minus 3 and so on
so then you find that there is a
bijection from q to the natural numbers
and the irrationals to
the integers less than or equal to 0 and
therefore there's a bijection from r to
the integers
but the integers are countable
which would contradict the fact that r
is uncountable
therefore the set of irrationals is
uncountable okay so in short if you
didn't follow that
the set of irrationals is
uncountable
because otherwise this would force r to
be countable okay
now i haven't proved yet that r is uh is
uncountable we'll do that in just a
minute and we'll use uh
a theorem about decimal uh expansions
for
or decimal representations of real
numbers
so
so now connecting
you know rationals and irrationals to
what you've seen since you were
small so to decimals we simply we
typically
we think of rational numbers as
in terms of decimal
decimal
representations
what does that mean
that means we take
if x is in
q
then we'll write x as
some number times
some digit times 10 to the k
plus
ten to the k minus one plus
d zero
and then
uh we go to the tenth spot so d to the
minus
d minus one ten to the minus 1 plus
so this is discussion i'm not stating
any theorems right now
until we get down to maybe some
last decimal spot
okay
and with
these digits
a subset of 0 1
9.
okay
so all i'm saying is typically we think
of x's this way and then we write
x as
d k
d k minus 1
d minus 1 d minus 2
and so on okay
[Applause]
i'm using this notation because i'm
going to be
this is the notation i need to state the
theorem about the real numbers
but
it's quite silly that i'm about to write
this down in this setting
you know
welcome to mit
so
for
example 1 times 10
plus 1
times 10 to the 0
plus 1 times
10 to the minus 1
right
the this is supposed to represent the
number 11.1
okay
which is the rational number
uh
okay
it's quite funny that i had to think
about that for a minute to go from the
decimal expansion to the rational
numbers
but um
you know don't give me too hard of a
time
in
a lot of at least pure math
we typically write things in rational
numbers we don't
write in decimal i haven't had to write
in decimal expansions in quite some time
anyways
now of course not all rational numbers
can be written as a finite decimal
expansion for example one-third you have
to write as
0.33333
and so on and so on
you know so that's not necessarily
covered under the
discussion that i have right here
um but it will become
covered um and what i'm about to stay
for the real numbers
um
so we could cover a third
uh and then we can also cover every real
number if we allow sort of infinite
decimal uh representations so i'll use
the word decimal expansions or decimal
representations interchangeably there
so
make a definition and what i'm going to
state is about real numbers between 0
and 1.
of course if you want to talk about real
numbers bigger than 1 then you just tack
on 1 to the
if you like to the d0 place
[Applause]
so the infinite part is having to deal
with what comes after the the decimal
point
um
so the let me make the following so this
is a rigorous definition
let x in
0 1 excluding 0
and let
d
minus j be in 0 1
to 9.
for j a natural number
so we say
x is
so what does it mean to say that x is
given by an infinite decimal expansion
or given by an infinite decimal
representation rotation we say x is
represented
by the digits
and we write
x is equal to
d minus 1 d minus 2
minus 3.
um
if so this is a precise meaning of this
if x is equal to the supremum
of
the set
so i take a finite
decimal expansion
and then
so i get a number for each in a natural
number so the first one is just d to
d minus 1 10 to the minus 1 and then for
n equals 2 i tack on next to hundreds
place and then the thousands place and
so i get
a set of real numbers
if i take it supremum and i get x then i
say that x is represented by
these digits or that x
or that this gives a decimal
representation of x
okay
so that
you see
this lines up with what
you know
if i look at 0.2500
remember this is now
the soup of
what
of a certain set so let me do
first this guy so this is
2 over 10 and then now i add the
hundreds place plus
5 up for 100 and then 2 over 10 plus
5 over 100 this is a set remember plus 0
over
1000 plus so
and
at each
next guy i'm supposed to take this and
add on another zero so as a set
this is just
a set containing two elements namely
two
tenths and
25 over 100
and so this is
uh bigger than that guy so the supremum
is 25 over 100 which equals a fourth
okay so all of that to tell you that yes
this definition should
or at least does
ring true with what you were taught that
a quarter is equal to 0.25
all right
okay um
so now we're done with the triangle
inequality
i'm going to erase this
and so this is uh the last bit of
discussion about
the elementary properties of the real
numbers next we'll be talking about
sequences of real numbers
okay
so
um
all right so i have this definition
the fundamental theorem about uh
the real numbers is that every real
number at least uh in the setting
between zero and one can be represented
uh
by a set of digits or it has a decimal
uh representation
in every decimal
if you like every set of digits
corresponds to
a decimal representation of a real
number
so let me state
the
second thing i said first
so
for every set of digits
b minus j
with
each of these d d minus j's in zero up
to nine
then
there exists
a unique x
in
closed interval 0 1
such that x is equal to
p minus 1 so
with this decimal representation
okay
so
you give me some digits
and i can find a unique real number that
has that decimal uh
representation
now before i state the the second part
of the theorem
this says that i give you digits i get a
unique real number now you ask about the
other direction
if i have a real number
do i get a unique set of digits and of
course that is not true
necessarily because for example
one-half
this is equal to
0.5
0 0 and so on
but this is also equal to 0.4999
and so on so
yes every
set of digits gives me a unique real
number
so if i gave you these digits they would
spit out one half and only one half it
wouldn't spit out a fourth
but if you give me a real number there
does not necessarily
uh give exist a unique
set of digits giving
a decimal expansion for that number so i
can have two different decimal
expansions i have point five nine point
four nine nine nine i will always have
at least one but it's not necessarily
unique okay but we can send we can
single out one unique
choice by requiring that
some sense uh if i were to truncate it
then the decimal expansion would be less
than the number i'm looking at
wanting to expand so that's the second
part of this theorem
is that for every x
in 0 1 now excluding 0
there exists
exist
unique digits
and as before these are in 0
up to 9
such that
x
is
such that these give a decimal
representation of x
and so what singles
out of choice if we're ever
coming up against these two things um
and
if i truncate
the decimal expansion
so i'm not going to write 0s after that
i'm just going to truncate it this
always is less than x
and this is less than or equal to
plus
10 to the minus n
okay
all right
so um
you know this inequality will always
hold
okay
um
and in fact
so
this inequality will always hold
and in fact x is always bigger than or
equal to this side like uh no matter
what if if x is given by
a decimal representation so we always
have these two
this is a less than or equal to and this
is a less than or equal to but we single
out a unique choice of decimal
representation by
choosing this to be a strict less than
okay so then that forces us to choose
this guy
over this guy
so
for theorem two
this would say that the represent the
unique representation
that satisfies this for one half is
given by 0.4999
and for example for one would be just
0.9999 okay
because if i take this representation
and cut it off this is actually equal to
one-half
and not less than one-half
okay
so that was a lot of discussion about
the theorem but that was for a reason
because i'm not actually going to prove
this theorem um
it's not uh entirely
difficult it just uses you know the
least upper bound property of the real
numbers
but it's a little um
clunky to write down and what i'd rather
do is just use this theorem
to prove
uh
my answer the answer to my question up
there on whether r is countable or not
okay
in the textbook there is a proof of this
theorem which you can read
okay
okay so
we're actually going to use this theorem
to prove
the following theorem due to cantor
so we just went from uh absolute values
which maybe was not too shock and awe
now to this theorem which to me is
shocking off is that
following that
the interval 0 1
is uncountable
okay
all right
so maybe you're asking yourself
well that's showing this is uncountable
and
that's saying r is
uh
uncountable
so where do we go from this to that
well i'll let you think about that but
let's assume this was uncountable and r
was countable so i'm just going to say
this
say y out loud
if this was um
uncountable and r was countable
then since this is a subset of r that
means
this under
would be
so
let me just write so
why does this imply
and i'm going to give you kind of a fake
proof but you can actually make this
completely rigorous
fake proof in the sense that i'm just
going to write symbols
that
imply this so why is
r
uncountable then if this is uncountable
well
the function that takes an element in
here just into r
this is clearly bijective so just the
identity map from 0 1 into r
is injective map
okay
so
i clearly have that
cardinality of this set
is less than or equal to
the cardinality of r
okay in fact
you know maybe you can think about it
maybe i'll put on the assignment but
in fact one can prove they have the same
cardinality but
i have that
and this is uncountable therefore its
cardinality
is bigger than the natural numbers
so this should imply that cardinality of
the natural numbers
is less than the cardinality of r
okay
in other words r is uncountable
all right so let's prove
this theorem due to cantor now
this other theorem due to cantor that
the
cardinality of
the power set is bigger than the
cardinality of the set i mean that was
at least the proof
the first time i saw that was some crazy
and
this is also going to be some pretty
crazy and clever too
um
so
this is what's referred to as cantor's
diagonalization argument
or diagonal argument
and it's the following so we're going to
prove this by contradiction
so we're going to assume that this is
countable so it can't be finite there's
infinitely many of
elements in here so suppose
uh that in fact it has the cardinality
of the natural numbers
and we're going to arrive at a
contradiction
so then
there exists a function which i'm going
to call x
from
natural numbers into
0 1
okay which is bijective
now
so let me
label this inequality star
for each in
we write x
of n so this is an element of 0 1.
so this is bijective so every element in
0 1
gets mapped onto so
we write x of n to be in its decimal
representation
i have two
indices now one for the digit
place and the one for
which
excuse me
at least i sheltered you from that
sneeze by putting my hand over the
microphone the microphone's still on
yeah
okay
so for each end we write
each x of n in its decimal
representation
satisfying star so each x in here can be
written uniquely
in a given decimal representation
satisfying this inequality here now what
we're going to do is we're going to come
up with
[Applause]
a real number in the interval 0 1
which x does not map to
which therefore contradicts the fact
that x is surjective remember bijective
surjective means
um
that
everything has to get mapped onto this
onto part
uh
injective means it maps different things
to different things
so what's
what's kind of the idea
of finding this
element that doesn't get mapped onto
so
let me
write down
just a few
of these decimal expansions
and i may not want to do a fourth one
and maybe i do
so this is uh again discussion so i'm
going to put this in brackets meaning
this is not part of the proof but this
is part of the idea of
what's going on and
where's the diagonal part
okay
so
and this should
go off in this direction and the decimal
expansions march off in that direction
and so somehow
this list if it kept going in that
direction
uh would have to contain every real
number between zero and one
okay
and so what's uh what's the idea to come
up with a real number between zero and
one
that
is not in this list is
we go down the diagonal
of the decimal expansions
and we
change
each decimal to something else
okay then what it is
and so therefore and then i take uh
my element y
so remember we're trying to find a y
not in this
list
and then i would take y to be the real
number that i get by changing each of
these
decimal uh
digits okay
so you can imagine if y somehow popped
up let's say it popped up
since i don't want to write anymore as
x4 all right then somehow this number
would have to be
the
digit for y
but i changed it and therefore it's not
the digit of y
okay
so
you know that's it in a nutshell
um
if you didn't get that that's fine let
me now write out uh
the details
so you know it's a little bit simpler to
to imagine if let's say all of these
were zeros and ones so instead of being
base ten i was base two
okay
and so instead of
uh if the digit was a zero i flipped it
to one
so
you can imagine that if y did so and
then i form
y by flipping the digits okay so if this
was 0 0 1 1
then y would start off 1 1 0 0
okay
and therefore if y appeared say 4th in
line
it would have to be 1 and 0 in the same
spot
okay just by how i've constructed y by
flipping it and therefore y can't be in
that list and therefore this map cannot
be
subjective
all right which is our contradiction
so
let me make this more precise
let
e j this is going to be one
if
the
j
digit of the j
x of j
does not equal one
okay
and
two
if the j digit of the j
guy in that list or x of j
does equal one
okay
by
part one of the theorem
previous theorem
there exists
a unique y
in zero one without zero why because
some of these did you know these digits
are non-zero it's always either one or
two
okay
such that
y is equal to e minus one e minus 2 and
so on ok
so moreover
since all
of these digits
are either one or two
they are
certainly non-zero
so y is given by a decimal expansion
where all of these things are non-zero
okay so that means
that for all in a natural number if i
take
a finite decimal expansion so i cut this
off at e to the minus n since e to the e
minus n plus one
is either one or two that's going to be
positive so
that's
less than y
and this is always the case that this is
less than or equal to
okay
so
because all these digits are positive if
i cut it off if i truncate it then
that number is going to be less than y
okay because i'm missing stuff out in
the millions place or whatever
each time
for each n okay
and therefore
this decimal expansion
is
the unique
decimal representation
from part two of the theorem okay that i
stated right
every element in zero one has a unique
representation satisfying that
inequality because all of these digits
are positive
this
in fact is a unique representation of
this element y which i've constructed by
flipping digits
from this map
now
since
x is
surjective
there exists an n natural number um you
know this n has nothing to do with that
n maybe i'll use a different letter
m
such that
y equals x of m
then
let's say i look at
e to the minus m
okay
so then
this says that
the m digit which is
should be giving me e to the minus m
because this is equal to y
this
remember is equal to
one
if
the m
two
if dm
equals one
in particular this does not equal
d
m
so i have proven that
this number
does not equal itself
okay
all right i can never if i can never
have this
number whatever it is equal to this
thing because i'm always changing it if
this thing is one
okay
then
this number is two
if this number is not one then this
number is one and therefore it's not
equal to that
okay
and this is a contradiction
thus uh
it shows that
the set is uncountable
okay
so i hope i explained that uh well
enough
you know you can also look in the
textbook for
uh
explanation as well and of course you
can ask me in office hours for
more explanation
let me fuel up real quick
okay
now we're moving on to a new chapter
[Applause]
um we're gonna get to
now we're going to get to the analysis
part so analysis as i've said before is
the study of limits real analysis is the
study of limits that has to deal with
real numbers
so let's get to
our first
notion of a limit and that is the limit
of a sequence of real numbers
so now we're moving on to
sequences and
series
okay so what is the precise definition
of a sequence of real numbers
a sequence
of real numbers is
precisely a function
x from
the natural numbers into r
okay just a function it doesn't have to
be bijectives or objective injective
anything it's just a function from the
natural numbers to r so that's precisely
what
a sequence of real numbers is uh now we
typically don't think of a sequence as a
function in fact we don't even use that
notation
we denote x of n by
x sub n
and
the associated sequence
by
this curly brackets
n equals 1 to infinity
or
we might not even
write the n equals 1 to infinity part
or
just start listing them
okay
all right
um
so
let me
quickly say that although
so again a sequence
you know unambiguously defined is a
function from the natural numbers to
real
so don't confuse this with a set okay a
sequence is not a set
all right
so
um
you know think of a sequence even though
again it's defined as a function as just
a
uh infinite listing
of elements of r okay
one element the the first element the
second element the third element and so
on
okay and they don't have to be different
okay so
for example
one one one one
one
that is a perfectly good sequence okay
in terms of what is the function this is
x of n
equals one
for all n but again i will not think of
really a sequence as a function
just as we never thought about
functions as
subsets of as certain subsets of
the cartesian product of two sets you
should really think of these as just a
list of
real numbers
okay
and when we refer to them we'll either
write them like that or with curly
brackets around an expression for x sub
n
so for example if i were to write
this
this means
this is the sequence
given by one one-half
one-third
one-fourth
one-fifth and so on
okay
okay um
[Applause]
so
here's another definition
so a sequence is bounded
if in some sense it doesn't run off to
arbitrarily large values
so
sequence
x sub n
bounded
if
there exists
some real number b bigger than or equal
to 0 such that
for all
n in the natural numbers
x n is less than or equal to b
an absolute value okay
so
again for example if we take a look back
at both of those two sequences
one one one
[Applause]
and the sequence one over n
are bounded why because every element in
this
um and i
uh every i shouldn't say element but
um
every entry in this sequence
is equal to one so it's bounded by one
and every entry in this sequence
uh
is less than or equal to one so it's
bounded by one in absolute value it's
also positive so they're both bounded
another example is the sequence
written -1 to the n
so
i'll write
equals although this shouldn't this
doesn't mean anything i'm just going to
write it
or start listing the the entries minus
one one minus one one minus one one
this is also bounded
because
the absolute value of minus 1 to the n
is 1 so that's bounded by 1 for all n
so what's a non-example
the
sequence
in
in other words this is the sequence one
two three four
five
and so on
now precisely why is it
un
so i should say
this is bounded
and otherwise i'll refer to x sub n as
unbound
unbounded
okay
so why is it unbounded because you know
the entries are getting larger and
larger in size
um but
you know if i were to ask you to prove
this
you would have to show so
and this is also a good first exercise
what does it mean to be unbounded
so i said this at one point
that if you come across a
reasonably interesting definition you
should look up
or try to come up with examples
and typically when you do come up with
examples you should come up with
non-examples and what that requires you
to do
is negate the definition okay what does
it mean for something to not be that
okay
so for
so even though
i'm saying that if it's not bounded i
call it unbounded i haven't actually
written a mathematical statement to this
effect on what this means
so let me make this uh right
here as a remark so
a sequence
is unbounded
so if it doesn't satisfy that definition
so we need to negate this definition the
definition says uh this is bounded if
there exists a b bigger than or equal to
zero such that this holds for all in
okay
now when i negate that there exists that
becomes a for all and when i negate a
for all that becomes of their exist
and then i negate this condition
so the sequence is unbounded if
for all b
bigger than or equal to zero there
exists
a natural number in n
such that
x in an absolute value
is bigger than b
okay
now using this so this is if you like
you can take that as a second definition
or it's not really a definition since
it's just the negation of the first
definition
why
does why is this set unbounded because
of the archimedean property right so
so now i'm i'm giving you a little short
proof on why this
sequence is unbounded
let b
be
bigger than or equal to zero
by
our comedian property
there exists a natural number
in
such that n
is bigger than b
which is exactly what we wanted to prove
because in this case x sub n is in
is unbounded
okay
[Applause]
now
what does it mean for
us to have a limit of a sequence what is
a limit of a
sequence mean what does it mean for a
real number to be
the limit of a sequence
um
what does it mean for a sequence to
converge to something so
sequence x of n
converges
to
real number x and r
if the following condition is satisfied
if
for every epsilon positive
there exists a natural number capital m
such that
for all n bigger than or equal to
capital m
x n minus x
absolute value is less than epsilon okay
now remember the absolute value is meant
to be something like a distance so what
does this statement say it says if i
give you a little bit of tolerance
epsilon
and you go far enough out in the
sequence
then
the distance between that entry in the
sequence and x
are very close to each other
okay
um
let me finish stating
uh the rest of this definition then
we'll we'll do a little more discussion
um
if a sequence converges we say it's
convergent
otherwise
we say it's divergent
okay
so
all right let me draw um
let me draw a little picture
what this is meant to to be so
um
the real
numbers you know
it was this uh
i mean it is this uh
unique uh ordered field with least upper
bound property but when you think about
the real numbers
you know think of it as you've always
thought about it as just the real number
line
so
what does this definition mean
it means that
that a sequence converges to
some x if
for every epsilon
i can do the following if i look at
if i
give
you an epsilon
and you go on either side of x
epsilon amount
then
you should be able to find a capital m
so that
if
you look at
entries in your sequence x sub n for n
bigger than or equal to m
they're in this guy so then i should
have x of m there
x of n plus 1
x of n plus 2
and in general
x sub n should be in there as long as n
is bigger than or equal to m so i should
be able to do this um for every epsilon
okay i give
so for any amount of tolerance epsilon
you should be able to go
far enough out in the sequence that all
entries
uh in that sequence
are within this tolerance
of x
okay
[Applause]
so
you know i mean
although this is a picture of what the
definition means
how should you
i mean you've probably gotten
plenty of
experience with sequences when you were
doing calculus but what does this mean
you know kind of loosely it means if i
look close to x
some little interval containing x
then all of the sequence all of the
elements of the sequence should be
eventually in this um
in this little interval
okay
or another way to think about it is that
as i go on in the sequence
the entries are getting closer and
closer and closer to x
okay
now the way one makes
kind of these last two um
you know intuitive statements precise is
by this definition okay the closer and
closer part is in
encapsulated in this for all epsilon
thought part
and eventually getting closer and closer
means
for all n bigger than or equal to
capital m as long as i go far enough out
in the sequence they're getting close to
x
okay so i hope that's
that's pretty clear
[Applause]
all right so again we have a definition
we have um
and it's
reasonably interesting so we should do
examples and then also negate it
but before i do either of those
i do want to just prove a very simple
fact about
convergent sequences namely that
if i have a sequence which converges to
x
then
x is the only thing that sequence can
converge to all right i cannot have a
convergent sequence which conver which
converges to two different things like i
said if you go by this intuition that
eventually the x
sub n's are getting closer and closer
and closer to x
well then there's no way they can be
also getting closer to something other
than x okay
so i just want to prove that real quick
and then we'll do examples and the
negation of this definition
so following theorem
and
so i'm going to state
first the theorem that has nothing to do
with sequences but uh um
is a nice way if you want to show two
things are equal
you can show they're smaller than
anything so the first theorem that i'm
going to state is uh
if
x and y are in r
and
all epsilon positive
x minus y is less than epsilon
then
x equals y this is not a surprising
statement if i have
uh
x and y and the distance between them is
arbitrarily small then they have to be
the same thing okay
um
so what's the proof
suppose x y is in r
and um
for all epsilon positive
x minus y is less than epsilon so now i
want to prove x equals y so let's assume
that this does not hold
and arrive at a contradiction so this is
a short proof by contradiction suppose x
does not equal y
then
remember we proved that
the absolute value of something is 0 if
and only
if that thing is equal to zero and it's
always non-negative
so x not equal to y means the absolute
value of x minus y is less than is
bigger than zero
then
by this assumption
for epsilon equal to x minus y over 2
i get
which implies if i just subtract that
over
x minus y is less than zero so one-half
is less than zero
or
and that's a very false statement we've
already proven that the absolute value
is always non-negative
okay so
if i have two real numbers that are
arbitrarily close to each other then
they have to be the same okay i'm going
to use this theorem to prove that
um i don't know why i put a one there
uh y
limits
uh
and i have not said uh
that's what we call x but
why a convergent sequence can only
converge to one thing
so
here's the statement of the second
theorem
if
x sub n is a sequence
and it converges to x
and it also converges to y
then x equals y so a convergent sequence
can only converge
to one thing okay
and again like i said this should be
clear because
what's happening is
if i have two things that are not equal
and x sub n converges to x that means as
long as i go far enough out in the
sequence they're supposed to be here in
this small
interval around x
while if they're supposed to be um
converging to y
if i go far enough out they're also
supposed to be over here
as long as i go far enough out
but you can't be in two places at once
um
ever and so that's what that's why x
must equal y
okay
although i suppose that now we're doing
all the classes online
some are recorded so you can be two
places at once but
at least not not in not here
um okay so we're going to use this
theorem to prove this statement
suppose
converges to
x and y
and i want to verify that for all
epsilon positive the absolute value of x
minus y is less than or equal to epsilon
okay
now remember if i'm proving something
for all epsilon
i have to that means i do it for
arbitrarily arbitrary epsilon
you get points just for setting let
epsilon be positive
okay now i want to show the absolute
value of x minus y is less than or equal
to epsilon and we're basically going to
do the argument that i just erased
so
since x sub n
converges to x
that implies that there exists a natural
number m1
such that
all n bigger than or equal to m1
x of n minus x is less than
epsilon over two y the epsilon over two
you'll see magic happens
and since
x sub n converges to y
that's this implies that there exists an
m2 natural number
such that
for all n bigger than or equal to m2
so again this is the part that says as
long as i go far enough out x of n has
to be close to x now this is the part
that says as long as i go far enough out
x of n has to be close to y
so that for all n bigger than or equal
to m 2
x of n minus y
is less than epsilon over 2.
okay
then
since
the sum and 1 plus these are both
natural numbers this is bigger than or
equal to m1
and
m2
this implies now
i'm going to use
these two inequalities
and the triangle inequality
then if i look at the absolute value of
x minus y this is equal to
the absolute value of x minus x sub n
plus
x of n minus
so let me not x sub n but x sub
m1 plus m2
plus
x sub m1 plus m2
now by the triangle inequality this is
less than or equal to x
m2 plus
m1 plus m2
minus y
now
this is less than epsilon over 2 because
m1 plus m2 is bigger than or equal to m1
and for the same reason since m1 plus m2
is bigger than or equal to m2 this is
less than epsilon over 2.
ah now you see why i divided both of
those by 2
because when i add them up i get epsilon
so i've shown that for every epsilon
positive
the absolute value of x minus y is less
than epsilon
and therefore
by the theorem that i proved a minute
ago
x equals y
okay
why did i
state that theorem because i want to use
notation and i want this notation to be
already
apparent that it's consistent
and i'm going to use terminology
so
this is not really a new definition it's
just some terminology
recall x
the limit of the sequence
now the fact that i've shown only
um
that there's only one guy that a
sequence can converge to is why i get to
use the word d so
not we call x a limit of x of n we it's
the limit because there's only one
uh if one
exists and write
x equals limit as n goes to infinity of
x sub n
okay
um
so let's pause on negating the
definition of
uh what it means for sequence to be
convergent and let's let's do a couple
of examples of convergent sequences
uh proving that they are convergent
sequences and computing what they
and at least proving that these
sequences do converge to the limit that
i'm telling you
so for example
let's look at the constant sequence x of
n equals one
for all n so that's uh
you know the sequence one one one so on
then
i'm just going to write 1 not x of n
the limit as n goes to infinity of 1
equals 1.
okay this this
proof is not very
enlightening so but
i'll show you how it goes
so you're supposed to show
what does this mean this means for every
epsilon positive there exists a natural
number capital m such that if i'm bigger
than capital m
this minus the limit should be less than
epsilon so let epsilon be positive i
have to now
come up with a capital m so that x of n
minus x is less than epsilon whenever
little n is bigger than or equal to
capital m
so i'm going to choose capital m to be
1. i can do that for this sequence
then
if n is bigger than or equal to m
and i look at the
nth uh entry in the sequence well this
is just one
minus one equals zero and that's less
than epsilon
okay so
not very enlightening because capital m
equals one uh
is good enough
so let's do something a little
more so how about the limit as n goes to
infinity
one over n equals zero
okay
so let's do a proof of this
again how i'm supposed to be proving
this epsilon statement uh
in the definition in order to be able to
to
state this
um
so which is a for every epsilon
statement so i start the proof off would
let epsilon be positive now i have to
find i have to tell you how to choose
capital m
to ensure that little n bigger than or
equal to capital m implies x of n minus
0 in this case is less than epsilon so
i will say choose capital m
natural number
such that
m is bigger than
one over epsilon okay
in fact i'm not going to write it that
way
i'm going to write it this way
1 over m is less than epsilon
and why can i do this why can i
find um
such a natural number that satisfies
this
you can't just insert statements into
your proof you know
choose capital m to satisfy the unicorn
property
and not
you know
clarify why you can
um
choose such a natural number that
satisfies the uniform prop the unicorn
property
um i can do this by the archimedean
property right this is equivalently
stating that i can find a natural number
m so that m is bigger than one over
epsilon what i had written there
originally
so let me write it this way
such a m exists by
the archimedean property of the natural
numbers okay i'll say that a few times
if i have to uh or
um to
clarify why
certain natural numbers satisfying
certain properties exist
and then at one point i'll just stop
because it should be clear that i've
done it enough times you know how or why
something does exist
okay so
i choose a natural number
and a
natural number m so that i have this
now i need to show you that um
this number works okay
so
let n be bigger than capital m
then if i look at x sub n minus my
proposed limit which is 0 so i look at 1
minus n
0 this is equal to just 1 over n since
little n is bigger than or equal to
capital m this is less than or equal to
capital m
okay
and which is less than epsilon
and therefore i've proven
what i wanted to prove
okay
so how do these you know if i just give
you a sequence and i ask you to prove
that
um
so this is some discussion
you know how do you come up with these
proofs how should the proof typically
look
if i want to prove
equals l
or x
um
you know what's the proof of that look
like it should always
so the proof would should be let epsilon
be positive and then maybe you need to
do some explaining
um
and then you'll say choose
m
so that something
okay
and
that such a m exists
probably will be explained there
okay
or in the same sentence
and then the next part of the proof
should be showing that this capital m
works
all right so then
if n is bigger than or equal to capital
m
then you should show that it works
by looking at x of n minus x
doing
calculation or inequalities and it's
arriving at this being less than epsilon
which is what you're wanting to prove
right you're wanting in the end to
verify this definition
yeah which says for every epsilon you
can find a capital m
so that i get this all right
so in a proof you are carrying that out
you're saying
for epsilon positive i choose m so that
this happens
okay
all right
now
um
you know how do you
how do you come up with such a capital m
so again this is just discussion and
maybe we won't get to any more examples
i'll just finish this discussion
and then we'll call it a day how do you
come up with such a capital m how did i
come up with
m
why did i choose m in this way you know
in the end you can see it here
is that um
i chose it because if i fiddle around
with the thing i want to bound
i ended up with one over m
which i can
control
right and make it smaller than epsilon
okay so typically how do you find
capital m
so this is a
discussion i guess within a discussion
typically you'll take x of n minus x
your proposed limit maybe i give you um
a
a sequence
explicitly or maybe it's a
expression involving some other
sequences
and you fiddle around with it maybe you
write it differently or
add and subtract something or multiply
uh by one in a fancy way
and
you'll get some expression uh
typically involving
something involving m
okay
and as long as
this expression involving m is simple
enough
then you choose capital m
so that this thing is less than epsilon
now simple enough for example one over m
i can choose capital m so that this is
less than epsilon by the archimedean
property
okay if
for example and that's basically
1 over m or 5 over m or something like
that
that kind of exhausts all the simplest
ones
for now
but if for example you ended up with 1
over m squared
minus 3m
minus plus 100 i would not say this is a
simple enough
expression to be able to say choose
capital m so that this is less than
epsilon without more explanation than
what i just gave here
okay
um
and we'll do some more uh
examples uh next time to to flesh this
out a little bit more
okay
all right so we'll stop there